Postdoc Position "Media, Inequality, and Democratic Support" @ ASCoR

 

Kathleen Beckers and Katjana Gattermann are looking for a postdoctoral researcher to join the Horizon Europe-funded project EDGE (“Enhancing Democratic Support under Conditions of Geographic and Intersectional Inequalities in Europe”) at the University of Amsterdam!

 

The postdoctoral researcher will become part of an international consortium that is coordinated by GESIS in Cologne and join the vibrant research environment at the Amsterdam School of Communication Research (ASCoR) and the Political Communication & Journalism group at the University of Amsterdam.

The position focuses on the role of media and digital information environments in shaping perceptions of inequality, blame, fairness, and democratic support. The postdoc will work on topics such as:


• Media framing of economic and social inequalities
• Survey experiments on inequality perceptions and democratic attitudes
• Comparative and interdisciplinary research on media, politics, and democracy

We are looking for candidates with a background in communication science, journalism, political science, or related fields, and a strong interest in quantitative empirical research.

 

The start date is 1 October 2026. The position is fully funded for 30 months. Depending on the specific needs of the Department of Communication Science, the contract may in some instances be extended with a maximum of 6 months to include teaching at the Graduate School or the College of Communication. This is determined after the interview process. The salary range is € 4.412 - € 6.433 gross per month pending prior experience, plus secondary benefits.

The application deadline is 7 June 2026. More information can be found here: https://werkenbij.uva.nl/en/vacancies/postdoc-position-media-inequality-and-democratic-support-netherlands-15076

Please do not hesitate to reach out to the project leaders Kathleen Beckers (k.a.e.beckers@uva.nl) or Katjana Gattermann (k.gattermann@uva.nl) for questions. 