2
Next session PolComm ERC Club on 9/12 “An Emotional Reaction: Analysing the
Public’s Response to Communication Tactics Used by Political Leaders in Norway
during the COVID-19 Pandemic” (Roy Aulie J.)
We are very pleased to introduce the program of the PolComm ECR Club – a new monthly online forum for
Early Career Researchers in political communication.
Organized by Olga Eisele and Alena Kluknavska, this initiative is open to PhD students & postdocs (≤4 yrs
post-PhD) in the ECPR or European Communication Research and Education Association (ECREA) political
communication sections!
Each session features 12–15 min presentation + feedback by a discussant + open Q&A.
Next session takes place on 9 december.
More information and registration: An Emotional Reaction: Analysing the Public's Response to
Communication Tactics Used by Political Leaders in Norway During the COVID-19 Pandemic
On 9 December at 12:00, the ECR Club will host a session discussing Roy Aulie J.’s work titled:
“An Emotional Reaction: Analyzing the Public’s Response to Communication Tactics Used by Political
Leaders in Norway During the COVID-19 Pandemic.”
The paper will be discussed by Pablo Jost. Many thanks to him for taking on this role.
The session will be chaired by Nicoleta Corbu.
The discussion will focus on how communication strategies on Facebook drive emotional responses and
shape public engagement. Emotional reactions such as “love,” “anger,” and “sad” increase post visibility
within users’ networks and support political participation, thereby amplifying citizen voices and public
discourse. The conceptual framework is grounded in framing, platformization, and engagement-focused
research, while addressing a key gap by examining the emotional dimension of engagement and its
democratic implications.
Empirically, the study is based on a content analysis of 5,645 Facebook posts related to the COVID-19
pandemic (March 2020–January 2022). Nine communication strategies, including criticism, crisis framing,
and excellence/renewal, were coded and analyzed using a multilevel approach.
The results show that criticism tends to evoke anger, leading to more comments and shares, while
excellence/renewal posts generate more “love” reactions and are widely shared but less commented on.
These findings highlight how different emotions align with communication strategies and offer insights for
improving political messaging and engagement on social media.
Full program: Academic Programme - Standing Group on Political Communication ECR Club
More info can be found on “How to join” tab. You’ll first need to log in via MyECPR account and then
register for the event.
Let’s build a supportive PolCom ECR community—see you in our sessions and help us spread the word!