A drizzle, not a storm: Polarisation around climate change in dutch political and media debates
Media Communication Public Opinion
Code:
S7
Date, Time and Location

Tuesday 11:00 - 11:45 GMT (10/02/2026)


Presenter: Edwin Jans, Wageningen University
Chair: Mariken van der Velden, VU Amsterdam


Abstract

Despite the vastly increasing scientific attention for political polarisation, effective conceptualisations and measures of different forms of polarisation in parliamentary records and news media are still lacking. Employing a longitudinal manual content analysis of parliamentary debates and newspaper articles on climate change, this study aims to accurately assess the development of polarisation in the Dutch political and media debate on climate change between 2010-2021, analysing three distinct forms of polarisation: ideological, affective, and factual belief. Preliminary results suggest that the levels of ideological polarisation have remained stable across this period, while affective and factual belief polarisation remain low, though are modestly increasing in recent years. In the political realm, these increases in climate change polarisation are mostly attributed to the increased presence of ecological and populist radical right parties, while the increases in the media realm are mostly observed in popular newspapers. More detailed results, including interactions between polarisation levels in the political and media realms, are planned for a future version.

Read More: https://ecpr.eu/Events/Event/PanelDetails/16972

Join Online: https://ecpr-eu.zoom.us/j/85212235856?pwd=xTw2V1AOaN7CvI9RbUOgT7gHgEfPAI.1 



Additional Info About the ECR Club: -- [ INSTRUCTION: KEEP THIS INFO SHORT! ]

About
Introducing the PolComm ECR Club – a new monthly online forum for early career researchers in political communication! This initiative is open to PhD students & postdocs (≤4 yrs post-PhD) in the ECPR or ECREA polcom sections.

Our Standing Group on Political Communication, in cooperation with the ECREA Political Communication Section, is thrilled to present the PolComm ECR Club – a monthly online forum for Early Career Researchers (ECRs) in political communication.

Are you a PhD student and a junior PostDoc (until 4 years after PhD) researching political communication? Looking for a supportive space to present your work, receive constructive feedback, and connect with peers across institutions? The PolComm ECR Lounge is here for you!

This monthly session provides ECRs with the opportunity to present and discuss their research, broadly defined within political communication.

The idea is to create an (online) safe space in which we can bring ECRs from different institutions together (= networking), help them to understand and navigate the (often unwritten) rules of academia (= socialising) and, of course, help them develop their research (= feedback on research) by receiving detailed constructive feedback from peers and senior researchers.

The session will help ECRs to present their work, receive feedback from a dedicated discussant, and engage in an interactive Q&A with peers. Beyond presentations, the ECR Lounge is a community where members support each other, exchange ideas, and build academic networks.

Each session follows a structured but informal format:

Monthly online sessions via the ECPR platform
One presentation per session (work-in-progress, full papers, research designs, or methodological approaches); one-hour slot
A dedicated discussant (another ECR or senior researcher) provides detailed, constructive feedback (Discussants can be proposed and contacted by ECRs themselves, but in general, the organising team takes over this task and recruits discussants from their network)
Interactive Q&A where participants engage with the presenter’s work
We encourage participants to attend regularly, not only to present but also to engage with others’ work, which fosters an environment of collaboration and shared learning.

If you're interested in joining, sign up for upcoming sessions and discussions. See the 'How to Join' tab for more details.
